Stephen Opiyo: yeah.
Jelmer Poelstra: minutes past.
Jelmer Poelstra: So welcome everybody to today's code club.
Jelmer Poelstra: we're gonna be talking about our markdown today.
Jelmer Poelstra: So markdown is.
Jelmer Poelstra: it's a very nice ecosystem of our packages.
Jelmer Poelstra: which you can produce content that not only has our code so so far we've been working with some are skits where we just have the barcode and we produce our results separately.
Jelmer Poelstra: But with our markdown you can produce documents that have our code, as well as the results of the code, and that includes figures, as well as other types of results and also nicely formatted pros.
Jelmer Poelstra: So this is a really nice way to, for instance, produce reports to show people your results you can even write your papers that way.
Jelmer Poelstra: And you could generally instead of using scripts you could replace that if, if you want by using our markdown so that you can include your notes and have your figures, in particular, I feel like for.
Jelmer Poelstra: For exploratory analysis, this is really useful.
Jelmer Poelstra: And so, in order to understand our markdown.
Jelmer Poelstra: we're going to need to learn about three new things, so the our part we we take for granted here we've learned about already, but there are three additional elements and.
Jelmer Poelstra: The first one of that is markdown.
Jelmer Poelstra: Which is a very lightweight text formatting language, and the second one is code chunks so these allow us to incorporate the our code that can actually be executed.
Jelmer Poelstra: And was results, we can display text figures and tables and then the third thing is is a sort of header with settings that's in a little language called GMO.
Jelmer Poelstra: And that yeah that then determine some settings for a good file.
Jelmer Poelstra: And and we're going to mainly talk about html page output, but there are actually many different formats, that you can output to which are markdown files and we'll see a little bit about that about the other options to.
Jelmer Poelstra: And at the core they are lockdown ecosystem is the markdown package so if you don't have that installed yet, then this is how you can do that.
Jelmer Poelstra: And, but we don't actually need to load it.
Jelmer Poelstra: And then the other thing to get set up.
Jelmer Poelstra: is to create.
Jelmer Poelstra: Inside the directory for club or you know, wherever you have your code club documents to create a directory for this week, so you can do that as follows in the console or you just create a directory, as you might normally do in your in your file explorer.
Jelmer Poelstra: Just make sure you've called this way so seven will use that later.
Jelmer Poelstra: And so, first, I think, to see what we're talking about here it's probably good to just actually see an example, so I am so we're going to run to these couple of steps so i'm going to.
Jelmer Poelstra: switch to my our studio and show you this, and if you want, you can follow along, otherwise you can just you can just watch.
Jelmer Poelstra: So i'm going to create a markdown file in my studio here so i'm going to click on file and then new file and then our markdown and then we get this dialog box, where we can enter some option so soon as.
Jelmer Poelstra: This room for a title here so i'm going to retitle i'm going to do a markdown DEMO.
Jelmer Poelstra: And the author already has my name and for you, it probably has your name and we're going to keep the output format as html.
Jelmer Poelstra: And then we actually get a a document that has that has some content in it already, so this is kind of.
Jelmer Poelstra: Our studios way to to to immediately show you what's possible and So here we already have all those three elements that we were talking about, so we have.
Jelmer Poelstra: some kind of header we have coach chunks of our hair with some weird format and get we'll talk about, and then we actually have some more or less regular text in here or more coach chunks as well.
Jelmer Poelstra: And so, now we can.
Jelmer Poelstra: Well, first we have to save it.
Jelmer Poelstra: Before we can.
Jelmer Poelstra: Section not responding, for me, you can also immediately.
Jelmer Poelstra: press the nit button, then it will prompt you actually to save it so you need to save it.
Jelmer Poelstra: Before you're able to render it.
save it has marked on DEMO.
Jelmer Poelstra: That R amp D to save it as a dot R amp D file and then it immediately renders so the process of producing from your raw markdown file and output file like html it's called rendering.
Jelmer Poelstra: and
Jelmer Poelstra: In in our studio it's, also known as nothing so we knit the file.
Jelmer Poelstra: And now we get this output file, so we can see that.
Jelmer Poelstra: We this heather here is not actually shown in, but we have the text that's here with which is somehow converted into some heather's we have.
Jelmer Poelstra: The code is actually displayed and the output of the code, including plots.
Jelmer Poelstra: So this is basically just a very quick overview of what our markdown file looks like and what the output looks I can so now what we're going to let me just get rid of that so now we're actually gonna we're going to step through a couple of the different elements.
Jelmer Poelstra: And so here also I show a quick side by side overview of a raw file and it's rendered counterpart in html.
Jelmer Poelstra: So we'll start now talking a little bit about markdown then we'll talk about coach chunks and then the memo header which are the three.
Jelmer Poelstra: three components that we need to learn about so first markdown, which is a very lightweight language to format plain text file and it actually evolved from simple in my formatting people applied in emails before you get started using html there and i'm sure you've also used.
Jelmer Poelstra: This kind of formatting to emphasize words, by putting Asterix around them, for instance, and so this is one way in which you can make text metallic in markdown so here's a short overview of some commonly used markdown syntax not going to go through this in detail.
Jelmer Poelstra: One reason for that being that these days, I still do actually as a visual markdown editor and adult it's almost like using a word processor, so you can also use keyboard shortcuts and press buttons to make things bold or italics.
Jelmer Poelstra: But just a few things I do want to highlight, so you can make habit others would have different levels by using pound signs or hashtags.
Jelmer Poelstra: With where one pound sign would make the highest level, and so forth, going to smaller levels.
Jelmer Poelstra: And then another thing that's important because our mark down in our markdown we're actually going to use a variant of this is presenting how you present code, so when you put back tix around some text, it will be formatted like so as as code.
Jelmer Poelstra: When you can also do is create code blocks so then use tree back tix.
Jelmer Poelstra: And then your code which can be any number of lines of code and again align with just three tactics and said, this will produce a code block but what's important to realize is with plain markdown.
Jelmer Poelstra: This will just affect the formatting so really nicely formatted as a cop block, but that doesn't mean that that code can actually run.
Jelmer Poelstra: And so, this is a little example.
Jelmer Poelstra: Where we use some of this formatting so the different heather levels can also include links we can equip figures and one thing that I want to highlight here is how markdown.
Jelmer Poelstra: And as white space which can be a little strange when you're not used to it, so, for instance here if we type A single word for line, this is not actually rendered in that way it is.
Jelmer Poelstra: It just becomes a regular sentence and another thing that's ignored, are all these extra spaces.
Jelmer Poelstra: So if you want to force new lines for some reason, there are a couple ways of doing that and one is by adding two spaces to the end of the line and then starting a new line.
Jelmer Poelstra: So that would force line breaks like is done here, so you give us two spaces after can and we've used two spaces after be and then we forced the line breaks and if you leave an empty line between text you'll start a new paragraph so there'll be also an empty line.
into rented put.
Jelmer Poelstra: into play markdown files of the extension empty and our markdown files which are the ones that we're going to use have the extension R amp D.
Jelmer Poelstra: And then the second aspect is integrating our code, so we saw above that play markdown has syntax for code formatting but the code is not actually going to be executed and what are our markdown allows us to do is, in fact.
Jelmer Poelstra: run the code and then we need to use syntax that's just slightly modified so for inline code, so we have an actual sentence and inside that sentence, we want to run some code so, for instance, we want to multiply 265 by 24.
Jelmer Poelstra: So, again we use these back tix, but this time we.
Jelmer Poelstra: We put in our just after the first tactic to indicate that this is in the language, and that is code that should be executed in the rendered form will then actually have.
Jelmer Poelstra: The sentence and in the sentence.
Jelmer Poelstra: The number that follows from the calculation.
Jelmer Poelstra: and similarly coat coat chunks are also.
Jelmer Poelstra: similar to the play markdown syntax but now we've put our in curly braces.
Jelmer Poelstra: And another thing we can do is actually add inside these curly braces besides just the our options and values so let's see a couple of examples of that.
Jelmer Poelstra: So here is a coach chunks code chunk with just default option, so we just put the tree back tix and then are between curly braces and then we put some code.
Jelmer Poelstra: And so the way that this will be rendered is that the code will be shown.
Jelmer Poelstra: And the output, will also be shown and so some of things we can do with these coach unk options, because sometimes you might not want to actually show either the output, or the code.
Jelmer Poelstra: So one option, for instance, is an ECHO is false and that will mean that the code itself is not displayed So what will happen then in the output is that we do not see the code, but we do see the output.
Jelmer Poelstra: And figures can also be printed, so in this case, we also add a caption in the options into chunk options, and so this will be rendered as follows, so we see the the code, we also see a warning that's given us output and then the plot is sprinted.
Jelmer Poelstra: As well as the caption that we added to it in here India in the code chunk options.
Jelmer Poelstra: And here's just a short overview actually can allow overview of.
Jelmer Poelstra: of several code chunk options, so, as I mentioned, sometimes you might not want to print the code sometimes you might not want to print the output.
Jelmer Poelstra: And there are a bunch of different ways, you can deal with this, and this is kind of get can get confusing actually I feel like the the syntax and the options are not incredibly intuitive, but you can refer to a table like this one, to to to do what you need to do in different cases.
Jelmer Poelstra: For instance, one thing you could also do is that you might want to print a qr code, but don't run it at all.
Jelmer Poelstra: And that's also possible and we use the email is false option and also we just saw that a message was printed or warning was printed.
Jelmer Poelstra: And that's something you would you, you probably often want to avoid having printed if you just have some reports that you want to send to collaborators or your advisor.
Jelmer Poelstra: You probably don't want these boilerplate warning, so you can set those off to with messages falls morning is false.
Jelmer Poelstra: And then here also are a bunch of options for figures, and this is something in the exercises that you'll be.
Jelmer Poelstra: you'll be playing around with a little bit, and you can refer to this overview with the different settings that you can use.
Jelmer Poelstra: and
Jelmer Poelstra: In many cases, you might want to have default settings for the entire document so you might make figures in 10 different chunks and you might want every time you might want the same dimensions of those figures.
Jelmer Poelstra: So, in order to avoid having to set them every time you can also do that, and you can.
Jelmer Poelstra: call this function of the NATO package to set defaults for the rest of the documents, and this is something that you usually put them in a code chunk at the top of your document and then these options will apply everywhere in your document.
Jelmer Poelstra: And then the third aspect.
Jelmer Poelstra: That we'll talk about is the memo header.
Jelmer Poelstra: So yama which stands for yellow ain't markup language is a very simple format and it's often used for configuration files and you can provide key value pairs in it to.
Jelmer Poelstra: To set certain aspects and, in this case, we want to set certain aspects of the output and also we're actually using it as a header.
Jelmer Poelstra: We include a heather with some the animal in the file and we put that at the very top of the file, as you saw in the little DEMO so here's an example of a very basic jamo heather so we set the author, we set a title and we set the output type as an html document.
Jelmer Poelstra: And then around the.
Jelmer Poelstra: The actual contents of the mo, how do we put these lines with just three dashes so it has to indicate the start and end of the month.
Jelmer Poelstra: And so, this very simple syntax it does get a little.
Jelmer Poelstra: Strange and in certainly error prone.
Jelmer Poelstra: When you have to add options, so a couple things change so in this case.
Jelmer Poelstra: We want to add a couple settings for the output html document so with these options we are adding a table of contents and we letting the table of contents float.
Jelmer Poelstra: And so what happens here is that, rather than html document going on the same line it actually goes on a on the next line also it's followed by co loans and it's indented and then the next levels are indented one more level.
Jelmer Poelstra: So it's important to to to do all of that, if you forget the columns here there'll be an error and these errors are not always very clear so so it's it's it's a good point to to take care when you're creating these GMO matters.
Jelmer Poelstra: And so, these are two options that you can use for html document and html document is generally the most common output format in there are many.
Jelmer Poelstra: options that you can use and that are quite Nice and just very easy edits to to to.
Jelmer Poelstra: To get some nicer formatting or do some other things so, for instance, when you do when you add coach download true you'll you'll have a button in your html file.
Jelmer Poelstra: That will enable people to download the code, you can also have the Code, the code fold so that only people that might be interested in the code can unfold it and then unfold it.
Jelmer Poelstra: You can add table contents like already mentioned.
Jelmer Poelstra: You can number sections, you can use different things, this is a very easy way to to quickly change the look of.
Jelmer Poelstra: The file so here three different themes that you can use and and that and how that DEMO will then end up looking.
Jelmer Poelstra: So those are the two main ingredients so just briefly wanted to touch on our markdown.
Jelmer Poelstra: And how it interacts with our studio so.
Jelmer Poelstra: We already saw that.
Jelmer Poelstra: That you can knit your document in our studio with that knit button and there's also keyboard shortcut to do that what you can also do, and let me know.
Jelmer Poelstra: switch back to.
Jelmer Poelstra: Our studio.
Jelmer Poelstra: What you can also do is is run individual coaching so there's a couple of buttons if this is a coach unk there's a couple buttons here, including this little play button, which would allow us to run individual coaching.
Jelmer Poelstra: And then another nice thing.
Jelmer Poelstra: Is that you can get a sort of live preview of your markdown document so instead of.
Jelmer Poelstra: Instead of.
Jelmer Poelstra: rendering it making changes and then rendering it and making change again a remedy to see what it is, you can.
Jelmer Poelstra: You can use this package, which is called.
Jelmer Poelstra: I think it's pronounced something like sharing and and and with that package you can use the.
Jelmer Poelstra: infinite Mon reader function, and this will sort of start up a server where your document is it's a sort of being constantly rented so whenever you save the file, it will re render so that's really nice and you can.
Jelmer Poelstra: You can maybe try try try that when you're doing the exercises and then the other thing I wanted to show you.
Jelmer Poelstra: In our studio now is the visual editor, so this is something that our studio added very recently sometime it a couple months ago.
Jelmer Poelstra: And, as I meant, and you can switch that on by clicking this button here in the top right, and I should mention that you need a very recent version, then of our studio so.
Jelmer Poelstra: To be at least 1.4 so you can check help and about our studio and if you're our studio is at least 1.4 you'll have this and otherwise you won't which is not.
Jelmer Poelstra: Not a problem in any way, but you might want to update to explore this option, so if you do have the recent version, you can click this icon here in the top right to switch to the visual editor and then it suddenly starting to look quite difference, and now it looks kind of like a hybrid.
Jelmer Poelstra: Between the raw document in the render document so we see that this heather instead of.
Jelmer Poelstra: being displayed with this two hashtags it's actually shown as a very large text.
Jelmer Poelstra: kind of like you have an inward and so and the chunks are also displayed a little differently and then there's also and then suddenly you have this toolbar here with all sorts of options.
Jelmer Poelstra: to insert citations to insert pictures and so on, so, then you don't need to remember.
Jelmer Poelstra: Much if any of the markdown syntax.
Jelmer Poelstra: Those are two things I wanted to show from our studio.
Jelmer Poelstra: And then finally just briefly, I want to mention so we've been looking a bit of html pages, and this is also what you'll.
Jelmer Poelstra: you'll try in the in the exercises, but there are many different output formats so there's the list of sort of built in output formats, with the our motown package is already pretty long and includes PowerPoint presentations PDF word documents.
Jelmer Poelstra: html presentations and so on.
Jelmer Poelstra: And then there's also a bunch of extension output format, some of which are really nice.
Jelmer Poelstra: And all that requires it basically that you install a separate package, and then you can start using those so one that's worth mentioning.
Jelmer Poelstra: In particular, is distill which is really good for technical contents, it has very good support for equation citations footnotes and so on, and they're also distill websites that you can create very easily and then articles.
Jelmer Poelstra: Is a format, that is, with which you can actually create.
Jelmer Poelstra: output, that is formatted the way that specific scientific journals wanted.
Jelmer Poelstra: You can create dashboards you can create books and then this is string and again.
Jelmer Poelstra: The package that as this this infinite memory their function to preview a document in that can also and its main function is to create pretty fancy presentations.
Jelmer Poelstra: So that's all I had pretty introduction.
Jelmer Poelstra: So we can start the breakout rooms and in it, you will work with our markdown file that you can download So if you run these two lines of code, you should get the markdown file and then you can open it up, and if you want, you can then also start up the.
Jelmer Poelstra: The sharing and function to preview your document and then play around.
Jelmer Poelstra: a bunch with this document.
Stephen Opiyo: We go to.
Stephen Opiyo: break a promo.
Jelmer Poelstra: yeah if you have.